Add HA best practices guide (#7556)
gardener/gardener: docs/usage/shoot_high_availability_best_practices.md

# Implementing High Availability and Tolerating Zone Outages

Implementing highly available software that can tolerate even a zone outage unscathed is no trivial task. You will find here various recommendations to get closer to that goal. While many recommendations are general enough, the examples are specific in how to achieve this in a Gardener-managed cluster and where/how to tweak the different control plane components. If you do not use Gardener, it may be still a worthwhile read.

> First however, what is a zone outage? It sounds like a clear-cut "thing", but it isn't. There are many things can go haywire. Here some examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First however, what is a zone outage? It sounds like a clear-cut "thing", but it isn't. There are many things that can go haywire. Here are some examples:
```

Author: Thx, changed.

- All services down, temporarily or permanently (the proverbial burning down data center :fire:)

This and everything in between make it hard to prepare for such events, but you can still do a lot. The most important recommendation is to not target specific issues too much - tomorrow another service will fail in an unanticipated way. Rather focus on [meaningful availability](https://research.google/pubs/pub50828) than on internal signals (useful, but not as relevant as the former). Always prefer automation over manual intervention (e.g. leader election is a pretty robust mechanism, auto-scaling may be required as well, etc.).

Also remember that HA is costly - you need to balance it against the cost of an outage as silly as this may sound, e.g. running all this excess capacity "just in case" vs. "going down" vs. a risk-based approach in between where you have means that will kick in, but they are not guaranteed to work (e.g. if the cloud provider is out of resource capacity). Maybe some of your components must run at the highest possible availability level, but others not - that's a decision only you can make.

## Control Plane

> The Kubernetes cluster control plane is managed by Gardener (as pods in separate infrastructure clusters to which you have no direct access) and can be set up with no, node, or zone HA.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it makes sense to keep this in line with the language [that the API](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types_common.go#L128-L151) and [documentation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_high_availability.md) use?

```suggestion
The Kubernetes cluster control plane is managed by Gardener (as pods in separate infrastructure clusters to which you have no direct access) and can be set up with the failure tolerance type `node` or `zone`.
```

As an aside: I'm not sure where/how we should describe what you (not) get as a default when you don't specify any of this? The docs linked above only talk about the two failure tolerance modes, they don't mention `none` (or whatever you want to call leaving out this mode).

Author: I'll try to rewrite that then/follow your advice. I decided at first against it, because it seemed to chatty to me (and didn't include the `none` type), but thinking about comments, I realised that I colored the document with my own mental model and I should have used the API terminology instead.

Author: Improved wording, used official terms and hopefully found acceptable solution for "no HA".

> The Kubernetes cluster control plane is managed by Gardener (as pods in separate infrastructure clusters to which you have no direct access) and can be set up with no, node, or zone HA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes cluster control plane is managed by Gardener (as pods in separate infrastructure clusters to which you have no direct access) and can be set up with no, [node, or zone HA](shoot_high_availability.md).
```

Author: Thx, changed/combined with @voelzmo feedback to use less `here`s.

> The Kubernetes cluster control plane is managed by Gardener (as pods in separate infrastructure clusters to which you have no direct access) and can be set up with no failure tolerance (control plane pods will be recreated best-effort when resources are available) or one of the [failure tolerance types `node` or `zone`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_high_availability.md).

Reviewer 3: Nit: You could use relative link. Just to make sure that when someone is browsing the docs at tag vX.Y.Z will be redirected to the same version of the referenced document (and not master).

```suggestion
The Kubernetes cluster control plane is managed by Gardener (as pods in separate infrastructure clusters to which you have no direct access) and can be set up with no failure tolerance (control plane pods will be recreated best-effort when resources are available) or one of the [failure tolerance types `node` or `zone`](shoot_high_availability.md).
```

Author: @ialidzhikov I will file another commit and "fix" that.

For the record though, it was deliberate and I weighted the pros and cons and decided against it, but if that's how it should be done in this repo, I will of course comply.

The reasons I find it "problematic", although your points are absolutely valid and it's how "it's done":
- The document is then bound to this repo and can be read only "in GitHub"
- This document specifically is one that people may want to "rip out" and save as MD file, which will then not work and all Gardener links will be dead
- Consequently, if I open the file locally, the links are dead and the error message is what is expected, e.g.: "File not found at path:
/docs/usage/shoot_high_availability.md"
- Link checkers must be aware or else they will fail

As I plan to post this document as blog, I will now replace the absolute with relative links and then replace the relative links again with absolute links. No big deal, `sed` is my friend, but I am still not convinced this is overall the right approach.

Having said that, I am using relative links myself, e.g. in the repo where this document was originally written (https://github.com/gardener/chaos-engineering), but not for this document. Maybe, inconsistent, but not everything is black and white.

However, following a repo guideline is important/generates value. If this repo (and all Gardener repos) require relative links, relative links it will be. :-)

@rfranzke mentioned something odd though, which is that absolute links won't work with `docforge`, which is why follow-up commits like https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7394/files#diff-b06e6db607964c79c376846a413d64583475deff87d705aacac96f7ca26975afR67 are done by @n-boshnakov. Is that so? I wasn't aware/wouldn't have expected that.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I agree that we don't have documented conventions for this.  If there is already one, @n-boshnakov @Kostov6 @dimitar-kostadinov feel free to link it. `docforge` should handle all links - relative and absolute.
I think the problem is that we don't have conventions similar to https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/. I myself raised similar question for missing conventions for which one should be used in the docs - "Shoot" or "shoot". So, I rather think that a convention for this question should be added.

Reviewer 4: The unwritten guidelines we follow for Gardener documentation in regards to linking Github resources is "resource is in the same repo -> relative link", "resource is in another repo -> absolute link". But you are right, there is no documented convention for using absolute vs relative links. I will update the [Formatting Guide](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/website/documentation/contribute/20_documentation/20_formatting_guide/_index.md) to include a note on absolute vs relative link usage.

> Strictly speaking, static workload does not really depend on the (high) availability of the control plane, but static workload doesn't rhyme with Cloud and Kubernetes and also means, that when you possibly need it the most, e.g. during a zone outage, critical self-healing or auto-scaling functionality won't be available to you and your workload, if your control plane is down as well. That's why, even though the resource consumption is significantly higher, we strongly recommend to put the control plane of productive clusters into zone HA, at least in all regions that have 3+ zones. Regions that have only 1 or 2 zones will not support zone HA and then your second best option is node HA (e.g. many Azure regions have only 2 zones), i.e. a zone outage can still take down your control plane, but individual node outages won't.

Reviewer 2: * Let's remove one of the weakening words here to clean this up a little
* adapted language to use 'failure tolerance type' instead of 'HA', just like the docs and API

BTW: I LOLed at the 'doesn't rhyme with Cloud' bit 😆 

```suggestion
Strictly speaking, static workload does not depend on the (high) availability of the control plane, but static workload doesn't rhyme with Cloud and Kubernetes and also means, that when you possibly need it the most, e.g. during a zone outage, critical self-healing or auto-scaling functionality won't be available to you and your workload, if your control plane is down as well. That's why, even though the resource consumption is significantly higher, we strongly recommend to put the control plane of productive clusters into failure tolerance type `zone`, at least in all regions that have 3+ zones. Regions that have only 1 or 2 zones don't support type `zone` and then your second best option is failure tolerance type `node`. For example, many Azure regions have only 2 zones, which means a zone outage can still take down your control plane, but individual node outages won't.
```

Author: Yes, I should have done that, thank you!

Author: > I LOLed at the 'doesn't rhyme with Cloud' bit 😆

I hope in a good way.

Thx, changed.

You can read more [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_high_availability.md) on the different options in Gardener. In the `shoot` resource it's merely only this what you need to add:

``` yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
spec:
  controlPlane:
    highAvailability:
      failureTolerance:

>         type: zone # valid values are `node` and `zone` (only available if your control plane resides in a region with 3+ zones)

Reviewer 2: Aside: we probably should add a comment like this also to the API docs https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types_common.go#L131

If you look at https://gardener.cloud/docs/gardener/api-reference/core/#failuretolerance it is impossible to find out which values you can put there.

Author: Leaving open as reminder.

``` yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
spec:
  provider:
    workers:
    - name: ...
      minimum: 6
      maximum: 60
      zones:
      - ...
```

Prefer regions with at least 2, better 3+ zones and list the zones in the `zones` section for each of your worker pools. Whether you need 2 or 3 zones at a minimum depends on your fail-over concept:

- Consensus-based software components (like ETCD) depend on maintaining a quorum of `(n/2)+1`, so you need at least 3 zones to tolerate the outage of 1 zone.
- Primary/Secondary-based software components need just 2 zones to tolerate the outage of 1 zone.
- Then there are software components that can scale out horizontally. They are probably fine with 2 zones, but you also need to think about the load-shift and that the remaining zone must then pick up the work of the unhealthy zone. With 2 zones, the remaining zone must cope with an increase of 100% load. With 3 zones, the remaining zones must only cope with an increase of 50% load (per zone).

> In general, the question is also whether you have the fail-over capacity already up and running or not. If not, i.e. you depend on re-scheduling on a healthy zone or auto-scaling, be aware that during a zone outage, you will see a resource crunch in the healthy zones. If you have no automation, i.e. only human operators (a.k.a. "red button approach"), you probably will not get the machines you need and even with automation, it may be tricky. But holding the capacity available at all times is costly. In the end, that's a decision only you can make. If you made that decision, please adapt the `minimum` and `maximum` settings for your worker pools accordingly.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In general, the question is also whether you have the fail-over capacity already up and running or not. If not, i.e. you depend on re-scheduling to a healthy zone or auto-scaling, be aware that during a zone outage, you will see a resource crunch in the healthy zones. If you have no automation, i.e. only human operators (a.k.a. "red button approach"), you probably will not get the machines you need and even with automation, it may be tricky. But holding the capacity available at all times is costly. In the end, that's a decision only you can make. If you made that decision, please adapt the `minimum` and `maximum` settings for your worker pools accordingly.
```

Author: Thanks.

Also, consider fall-back worker pools (with different/alternative machine types) and cluster autoscaler expanders, too. Read more about those concepts [here](https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler/blob/machine-controller-manager-provider/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#what-are-expanders) and [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/expander/priority/readme.md).

Gardener-managed clusters deploy the [cluster autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/cluster-autoscaler) or CA for short and you can tweak the general CA knobs for Gardener-managed clusters like so:

> ``` yaml

Reviewer 2: Is this a piece that we would want people to copy/paste to their shoot.yamls? If not, I guess we could link to https://gardener.cloud/docs/gardener/api-reference/core/#clusterautoscaler instead? If yes, we maybe need to explain a bit more about the tradeoffs that these settings deal with?

Author: Actually, I did that on purpose in many places, not as in-place documentation (not at all), but so that people see it/get the idea what can be done. People will not always click the links and may then not see the (useful) options offered there. So, it places the information more directly in front of them. I at least like that when I read such papers, i.e. I like it if the author lets me glimpse into the space of options and seeds ideas what can be done rather than only passing me on to the docs.

Author: Added your proposed link, but kept the spec snippet for the reason mentioned above.

apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
spec:
  kubernetes:
    clusterAutoscaler:
      expander: "least-waste"
      scanInterval: 5s
      scaleDownDelayAfterAdd: 1m
      scaleDownDelayAfterDelete: 0s
      scaleDownDelayAfterFailure: 1m
      scaleDownUnneededTime: 1m
      scaleDownUtilizationThreshold: 0.5
      ignoreTaints:
        - "node.kubernetes.io/memory-pressure"
        - "node.kubernetes.io/disk-pressure"
```

> If you want to be ready for a sudden spike or have some buffer in general, launch "placeholder" pods with [low priority](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption) and appropriate resource requests. This way, they will demand nodes to be provisioned for them, but if any pod comes up with a regular/higher priority, the low priority pods will be evicted to make space for the more important ones. Strictly speaking, this is not related to HA, but it may be important to keep this in mind as you generally want critical components to be rescheduled as fast as possible and if there is no node available, it may take 3 minutes or longer to do so (depending on the cloud provider). Besides, not only zones can fail, but also individual nodes.

Reviewer 2: Should we maybe link to the idea/concept in Cluster Autoscaler directly? This also includes the reference to k8s docs about pod priority and preemption.

```suggestion
If you want to be ready for a sudden spike or have some buffer in general, launch "placeholder" pods with [low priority](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#how-can-i-configure-overprovisioning-with-cluster-autoscaler) and appropriate resource requests. This way, they will demand nodes to be provisioned for them, but if any pod comes up with a regular/higher priority, the low priority pods will be evicted to make space for the more important ones. Strictly speaking, this is not related to HA, but it may be important to keep this in mind as you generally want critical components to be rescheduled as fast as possible and if there is no node available, it may take 3 minutes or longer to do so (depending on the cloud provider). Besides, not only zones can fail, but also individual nodes.
```

Author: Yes, very good idea. I added the new link around "placeholder pods" and kept the old link around "priority".

So, how to run with multiple replicas? That's the easiest part in Kubernetes and the two most important resources, `Deployments` and `StatefulSet`, support that out of the box:

``` yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment | StatefulSet
spec:
  replicas: ...
```

The problem comes with the number of replicas. It's easy only if the number is static, e.g. 2 for active-active/passive or 3 for consensus-based software components, but what with software components that can scale out horizontally? Here you usually do not set the number of replicas statically, but make us of the [horizontal pod autoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale) or HPA for short (built-in; part of the kube-controller-manager). There are also other options like the [cluster proportional autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-proportional-autoscaler), but while the former works based on metrics, the latter is more a guestimate approach that derives the number of replicas from the number of nodes/cores in a cluster. Sometimes useful, but often blind to the actual demand.

> So, HPA it is then for most of the cases. However, what is the resource (e.g. CPU or memory) that drives the number of desired replicas? Again, this is up to you, but not always is CPU or memory the best choice. In some cases, [custom metrics](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#scaling-on-custom-metrics) may be more appropriate, e.g. requests per second (it was also for us).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, HPA it is then for most of the cases. However, what is the resource (e.g. CPU or memory) that drives the number of desired replicas? Again, this is up to you, but not always are CPU or memory the best choice. In some cases, [custom metrics](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#scaling-on-custom-metrics) may be more appropriate, e.g. requests per second (it was also for us).
```

Author: I am not 100% certain, whether it's this or that or can be both, but I took your suggestion now. :-) Thx.

> You will have to create specific `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` resources for your scale target and can tweak the general HPA knobs for Gardener-managed clusters like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will have to create specific `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` resources for your scale target and can tweak the general HPA knobs for Gardener-managed clusters like this:
```

Author: Thx

> ``` yaml

Reviewer 2: The same question as with the above snippet: do we want people to copy-paste this directly? Should we rather link to https://gardener.cloud/docs/gardener/api-reference/core/#horizontalpodautoscalerconfig instead?

Author: Same as above, kept snippet, added link for reference.

Purpose is not copy&paste, but to give an idea what's possible as people most often won't follow the link and would then miss out on the options.

apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
spec:
  kubernetes:
    kubeControllerManager:
      horizontalPodAutoscaler:
        syncPeriod: 30s
        tolerance: 0.1
        downscaleStabilization: 5m0s
        initialReadinessDelay: 30s
        cpuInitializationPeriod: 5m0s
```

## Resources (Vertical Scaling)

> While it is important to set a sufficient number of replicas, it is also important to give the pods sufficient resources (CPU and memory). This is especially true when you think about HA. When a zone goes down, you might depend to get up replacement pods, if you don't have them running already to take over the load from the impacted zone. Likewise, e.g. with active-active software components, you can expect the remaining pods to run more load. If you cannot scale them out horizontally to serve the load, you will probably need to scale them out vertically. This is done by the [vertical pod autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler) or VPA for short (not built-in; part of the autoscaler repository).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is important to set a sufficient number of replicas, it is also important to give the pods sufficient resources (CPU and memory). This is especially true when you think about HA. When a zone goes down, you might depend on getting up replacement pods, if you don't have them running already, to take over the load from the impacted zone. Likewise, e.g. with active-active software components, you can expect the remaining pods to run with more load. If you cannot scale them out horizontally to serve the load, you will probably need to scale them out vertically. This is done by the [vertical pod autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler) or VPA for short (not built-in; part of the autoscaler repository).
```

Author: Thx.

> While it is important to set a sufficient number of replicas, it is also important to give the pods sufficient resources (CPU and memory). This is especially true when you think about HA. When a zone goes down, you might depend to get up replacement pods, if you don't have them running already to take over the load from the impacted zone. Likewise, e.g. with active-active software components, you can expect the remaining pods to run more load. If you cannot scale them out horizontally to serve the load, you will probably need to scale them out vertically. This is done by the [vertical pod autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler) or VPA for short (not built-in; part of the autoscaler repository).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While it is important to set a sufficient number of replicas, it is also important to give the pods sufficient resources (CPU and memory). This is especially true when you think about HA. When a zone goes down, you might need to get up replacement pods, if you don't have them running already to take over the load from the impacted zone. Likewise, e.g. with active-active software components, you can expect the remaining pods to receive more load. If you cannot scale them out horizontally to serve the load, you will probably need to scale them out vertically. This is done by the [vertical pod autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler) or VPA for short (not built-in; part of the autoscaler repository).
```

Author: Uups, 2 people corrected the same 2 words. :-) Thank you both, I took your suggestion @voelzmo now as it avoids the gerund form. Hope you don't mind @ScheererJ as I first took your suggestion.

A few caveats though:

> - You cannot use HPA and VPA on the same metrics as they would influence each other, which would lead to pod trashing (more replicas require less resources; less resources require more replicas)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You cannot use HPA and VPA on the same metrics as they would influence each other, which would lead to pod trashing (more replicas require fewer resources; fewer resources require more replicas)
```

Author: Thx

> While it is important to set a sufficient number of replicas, it is also important to give the pods sufficient resources (CPU and memory). This is especially true when you think about HA. When a zone goes down, you might need to get up replacement pods, if you don't have them running already to take over the load from the impacted zone. Likewise, e.g. with active-active software components, you can expect the remaining pods to receive more load. If you cannot scale them out horizontally to serve the load, you will probably need to scale them out vertically. This is done by the [vertical pod autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler) or VPA for short (not built-in; part of the autoscaler repository).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While it is important to set a sufficient number of replicas, it is also important to give the pods sufficient resources (CPU and memory). This is especially true when you think about HA. When a zone goes down, you might need to get up replacement pods, if you don't have them running already to take over the load from the impacted zone. Likewise, e.g. with active-active software components, you can expect the remaining pods to receive more load. If you cannot scale them out horizontally to serve the load, you will probably need to scale them out vertically. This is done by the [vertical pod autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler) or VPA for short (not built-in; part of the [kubernetes/autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler) repository).
```

Author: Nice, thank you.

- Scaling horizontally doesn't cause downtimes (at least not when out-scaling and only one replica is affected when in-scaling), but scaling vertically does (if the pod runs OOM anyway, but also when new recommendations are applied, resource requests for existing pods may be changed, which causes the pods to be rescheduled). Although the discussion is going on for a very long time now, that is still not supported in-place yet (see [KEP 1287](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources/README.md), [implementation in Kubernetes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/102884), [implementation in VPA](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/4016)).

> Anyway, VPA is a useful tool and Gardener-managed clusters deploy a VPA for you (HPA is supported anyway as it's an integral built-in part of the kube-controller-manager). You will have to create specific `VerticalPodAutoscaler` resources for your scale target and can tweak the general VPA knobs for Gardener-managed clusters like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anyway, VPA is a useful tool and Gardener-managed clusters deploy a VPA for you (HPA is supported anyway as it's an integral built-in part of the kube-controller-manager). You will have to create specific `VerticalPodAutoscaler` resources for your scale target and can tweak the general VPA knobs for Gardener-managed clusters like this:
```

Author: Thx

> Anyway, VPA is a useful tool and Gardener-managed clusters deploy a VPA for you (HPA is supported anyway as it's an integral built-in part of the kube-controller-manager). You will have to create specific `VerticalPodAutoscaler` resources for your scale target and can tweak the general VPA knobs for Gardener-managed clusters like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
VPA is a useful tool and Gardener-managed clusters deploy a VPA for you (HPA is supported anyway as it's a built-in part of the kube-controller-manager). You will have to create specific `VerticalPodAutoscaler` resources for your scale target and can tweak the general VPA knobs for Gardener-managed clusters like so:
```

Author: Thx

> ``` yaml

Reviewer 2: See above: copy-pastable snippet vs linking to the API docs?

Author: Thx, handled as above.

> VPA is a useful tool and Gardener-managed clusters deploy a VPA for you (HPA is supported anyway as it's built into the kube-controller-manager). You will have to create specific `VerticalPodAutoscaler` resources for your scale target and can [tweak the general VPA knobs](https://gardener.cloud/docs/gardener/api-reference/core/#verticalpodautoscaler) for Gardener-managed clusters like this:

Reviewer 3: Nit: VPA is enabled by default, Gardener does not deploy VPA unconditionally.

```suggestion
VPA is a useful tool and Gardener-managed clusters deploy a VPA by default for you (HPA is supported anyway as it's built into the kube-controller-manager). You will have to create specific `VerticalPodAutoscaler` resources for your scale target and can [tweak the general VPA knobs](https://gardener.cloud/docs/gardener/api-reference/core/#verticalpodautoscaler) for Gardener-managed clusters like this:
```

Author: OK, added.

apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
spec:
  kubernetes:
    verticalPodAutoscaler:
      enabled: true
      evictAfterOOMThreshold: 10m0s
      evictionRateBurst: 1
      evictionRateLimit: -1
      evictionTolerance: 0.5
      recommendationMarginFraction: 0.15
      updaterInterval: 1m0s
      recommenderInterval: 1m0s
```

While horizontal pod autoscaling is relatively straight-forward, it takes a long time to master vertical pod autoscaling. We saw [performance issues](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/4498), hard-coded behavior (on OOM, memory is bumped by +20% and it may take a few iterations to reach a good level), unintended pod disruptions by applying new resource requests (after 12h all targeted pods will receive new requests even though individually they would be fine without, which also drives active-passive resource consumption up), difficulties to deal with spiky workload in general (due to the algorithmic approach it takes), recommended requests may exceed node capacity, limit scaling is proportional and therefore often useless, and more. VPA is a double-edged sword: useful and necessary, but not easy to handle.

> While we are at it, we mostly removed limits from our components. Why?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the Gardener-managed components, we mostly removed limits. Why?
```

Author: Thx

> While horizontal pod autoscaling is relatively straight-forward, it takes a long time to master vertical pod autoscaling. We saw [performance issues](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/4498), hard-coded behavior (on OOM, memory is bumped by +20% and it may take a few iterations to reach a good level), unintended pod disruptions by applying new resource requests (after 12h all targeted pods will receive new requests even though individually they would be fine without, which also drives active-passive resource consumption up), difficulties to deal with spiky workload in general (due to the algorithmic approach it takes), recommended requests may exceed node capacity, limit scaling is proportional and therefore often useless, and more. VPA is a double-edged sword: useful and necessary, but not easy to handle.

Reviewer 3: It would be useful to link upstream issues (if we have any, of course) for the described drawbacks.

- CPU limits have almost always only downsides. They cause needless CPU throttling, which is not even easily visible. CPU requests turn into `cpu shares`, so if the node has capacity, the pod may consume the freely available CPU, but not if you have set limits, which curtail the pod by means of `cpu quota`. There are only certain scenarios in which they may make sense, e.g. if you set requests=limits and thereby define a pod with `guaranteed` [QoS](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/quality-service-pod), which influences your `cgroup` placement. However, that is difficult to do for the components you implement yourself and practically impossible for the components you just consume, because what's the correct value for requests/limits and will it hold true also if the load increases and what happens if a zone goes down or with the next update/version of this component? If anything, CPU limits caused outages, not helped prevent them.

> - As for memory limits, they are slightly more useful, because CPU is compressible and memory is not, so if one pod runs berserk, it may take others down (with CPU, `cpu shares` make it as fair as possible), depending on which OOM killer strikes (a complicated topic by itself). You don't want the operating system OOM killer to strike as the result is unpredictable. Better, it's the cgroup OOM killer or even the `kubelet`s eviction, if the consumption is slow enough as [it takes priorities into consideration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/#interactions-of-pod-priority-and-qos) even. Anyway, if your component is critical and a singleton (e.g. node daemon set pods), you are better off also without memory limits, because letting the pod go OOM because of artificial/wrong memory limits can mean that the node becomes unusable. Hence, such components also better run only with no or a very high memory limit, so that you can catch the occasional memory leak (bug) eventually, but under normal operation, if you cannot decide about a true upper limit, rather not have limits and cause endless outages through them or when you need the pods the most (during a zone outage) where all your assumptions went out of the window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As for memory limits, they are slightly more useful, because CPU is compressible and memory is not, so if one pod runs berserk, it may take others down (with CPU, `cpu shares` make it as fair as possible), depending on which OOM killer strikes (a complicated topic by itself). You don't want the operating system OOM killer to strike as the result is unpredictable. Better, it's the cgroup OOM killer or even the `kubelet`'s eviction, if the consumption is slow enough as [it takes priorities into consideration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/#interactions-of-pod-priority-and-qos) even. Anyway, if your component is critical and a singleton (e.g. node daemon set pods), you are better off also without memory limits, because letting the pod go OOM because of artificial/wrong memory limits can mean that the node becomes unusable. Hence, such components also better run only with no or a very high memory limit, so that you can catch the occasional memory leak (bug) eventually, but under normal operation, if you cannot decide about a true upper limit, rather not have limits and cause endless outages through them or when you need the pods the most (during a zone outage) where all your assumptions went out of the window.
```

Author: Thx

> - As for memory limits, they are slightly more useful, because CPU is compressible and memory is not, so if one pod runs berserk, it may take others down (with CPU, `cpu shares` make it as fair as possible), depending on which OOM killer strikes (a complicated topic by itself). You don't want the operating system OOM killer to strike as the result is unpredictable. Better, it's the cgroup OOM killer or even the `kubelet`s eviction, if the consumption is slow enough as [it takes priorities into consideration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/#interactions-of-pod-priority-and-qos) even. Anyway, if your component is critical and a singleton (e.g. node daemon set pods), you are better off also without memory limits, because letting the pod go OOM because of artificial/wrong memory limits can mean that the node becomes unusable. Hence, such components also better run only with no or a very high memory limit, so that you can catch the occasional memory leak (bug) eventually, but under normal operation, if you cannot decide about a true upper limit, rather not have limits and cause endless outages through them or when you need the pods the most (during a zone outage) where all your assumptions went out of the window.

Reviewer 2: Removing another 'Anyway, ' – diff doesn't seem to show this properly, sorry.

```suggestion
- As for memory limits, they are slightly more useful, because CPU is compressible and memory is not, so if one pod runs berserk, it may take others down (with CPU, `cpu shares` make it as fair as possible), depending on which OOM killer strikes (a complicated topic by itself). You don't want the operating system OOM killer to strike as the result is unpredictable. Better, it's the cgroup OOM killer or even the `kubelet`s eviction, if the consumption is slow enough as [it takes priorities into consideration](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/#interactions-of-pod-priority-and-qos) even. If your component is critical and a singleton (e.g. node daemon set pods), you are better off also without memory limits, because letting the pod go OOM because of artificial/wrong memory limits can mean that the node becomes unusable. Hence, such components also better run only with no or a very high memory limit, so that you can catch the occasional memory leak (bug) eventually, but under normal operation, if you cannot decide about a true upper limit, rather not have limits and cause endless outages through them or when you need the pods the most (during a zone outage) where all your assumptions went out of the window.
```

Author: Thx

The downside of having poor or no limits and poor and no requests is that nodes may "die" more often. Contrary to the expectation, even for managed services, the managed service is not responsible or cannot guarantee the health of a node under all circumstances, since the end user defines what is run on the nodes (shared responsibility). If the workload exhausts any resource, it will be the end of the node, e.g. by compressing the CPU too much (so that the `kubelet` fails to do its work), exhausting the main memory too fast, disk space, file handles, or any other resource. The `kubelet` allows for explicit reservation of resources for operating system daemons (`system-reserved`) and Kubernetes daemons (`kube-reserved`) that are subtracted from the actual node resources and become the allocatable node resources for your workload/pods. All managed services configure these settings "by rule of thumb" (a balancing act), but cannot guarantee that the values won't waste resources or always will be sufficient. You will have to fine-tune them eventually and adapt them to your needs.

> About `system-reserved` and `kube-reserved`, you can read more (explicit resource reservation) [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/reserve-compute-resources) and about `kubelet` eviction, you can read more (soft and hard eviction thresholds) [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/node-pressure-eviction) and configure those for Gardener-managed clusters like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
About `system-reserved` and `kube-reserved`, you can read more (explicit resource reservation) [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/reserve-compute-resources) and about `kubelet` eviction, you can read more (soft and hard eviction thresholds) [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/node-pressure-eviction) and configure those for Gardener-managed clusters like this:
```

Author: Thx

        memoryAvailable: 1m30s
        imageFSAvailable: 1m30s
        imageFSInodesFree: 1m30s
        nodeFSAvailable: 1m30s
        nodeFSInodesFree: 1m30s
      evictionHard:                            # hard, i.e. immediate eviction (used if the node is out of resources, avoiding the OS generally run out of resources fail processes indiscriminately)
        memoryAvailable: 100Mi
        imageFSAvailable: 5%
        imageFSInodesFree: 5%
        nodeFSAvailable: 5%
        nodeFSInodesFree: 5%
      evictionMinimumReclaim:                  # additional resources to reclaim after hitting the hard eviction thresholds to not hit the same thresholds soon after again
        memoryAvailable: 0Mi
        imageFSAvailable: 0Mi
        imageFSInodesFree: 0Mi
        nodeFSAvailable: 0Mi
        nodeFSInodesFree: 0Mi
      evictionMaxPodGracePeriod: 90            # caps pod's `terminationGracePeriodSeconds` value during soft evictions (general grace periods)
      evictionPressureTransitionPeriod: 4m0s   # stabilization time window to avoid flapping of node eviction state
```

> You can tweak these settings also individually per worker pool (`spec.provider.workers.kubernetes.kubelet...`), which makes sense especially with different machine types (and also workload that may you may want to schedule there).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can tweak these settings also individually per worker pool (`spec.provider.workers.kubernetes.kubelet...`), which makes sense especially with different machine types (and also workload that you may want to schedule there).
```

Author: Thx

Physical memory is not compressible, but you can overcome this issue to some degree (alpha since Kubernetes `v1.22` in combination with the feature gate `NodeSwap` on the `kubelet`) with swap memory. You can read more in this [introductory blog](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/08/09/run-nodes-with-swap-alpha) and the [docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/#swap-memory). If you chose to use it (still only alpha at the time of this writing) you may want to consider also the risks associated with swap memory:

- Reduced performance predictability
- Reduced performance up to page trashing
- Reduced security as secrets, normally held only in memory, could be swapped out to disk

> That said, the various options mentioned above are only remotely related to HA and will not be further explored throughout this document, but just to remind you: if a zone goes down, load patterns will shift, existing pods will probably receive more load and will require more resources (especially because it is often practically impossible to set "proper" resource requests, which drive node allocation - limits are always ignored by the scheduler) or more pods will/must be placed on the existing and/or new nodes and then these settings, which are generally critical (especially if you switch on [bin-packing for Gardener-managed clusters](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_scheduling_profiles.md) as a cost saving measure), will become even more critical during a zone outage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That said, the various options mentioned above are only remotely related to HA and will not be further explored throughout this document, but just to remind you: if a zone goes down, load patterns will shift, existing pods will probably receive more load and will require more resources (especially because it is often practically impossible to set "proper" resource requests, which drive node allocation - limits are always ignored by the scheduler) or more pods will/must be placed on the existing and/or new nodes and then these settings, which are generally critical (especially if you switch on [bin-packing for Gardener-managed clusters](shoot_scheduling_profiles.md) as a cost saving measure), will become even more critical during a zone outage.
```

- If the pod is not ready, the endpoint will be removed and the pod will not receive traffic anymore
- If the pod is not ready, the pod counts into the pod disruption budget and if the budget is exceeded, no further voluntary pod disruptions will be permitted for the remaining ready pods (e.g. no eviction, no voluntary horizontal or vertical scaling, if the pod runs on a node that is about to be drained or in draining, draining will be paused until the max drain timeout passes)

As you can see, all of these probes are (also) related to HA (mostly the `readinessProbe`, but depending on your workload, you can also leverage `livenessProbe` and `startupProbe` into your HA strategy). If Kubernetes doesn't know about the individual status of your container/pod, it won't do anything for you (right away). That said, later/indirectly something might/will happen via the node status that can also be ready or not ready, which influences the pods and load balancer listener registration (a not ready node will not receive cluster traffic anymore), but this process is worker pool global and reacts delayed and also doesn't discriminate between the containers/pods on a node.

> In addition, Kubernetes also offers [pod readiness gates](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-readiness-gate) and some cloud provider cloud-controller-managers support them natively (e.g. [AWS](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.1/deploy/pod_readiness_gate)). If you can, make use of them to incorporate also the LB registration state into your overall pod readiness (normally, only the sum of the container readiness matters, but pod readiness gates additionally count into the overall pod readiness). That's the only way, with Kubernetes means, to block (by means of pod disruption budgets that we will talk about next) the roll-out of your workload/nodes in case the LB registration fails (e.g. rate limited or whatever).

Reviewer 3: gardener-extension-provider-aws is not using https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller, it is using https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-aws. Let's remove this link/text or link other CCM that supports the feature. Otherwise, it can be confusing for the reader (docs stated that it is supported on AWS, but it does not work on my cluster).

Author: Very good catch, dropped and replaced with a more general introduction of the feature:

> In addition, Kubernetes also offers [pod readiness gates](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-readiness-gate) to amend your pod readiness with additional custom conditions (normally, only the sum of the container readiness matters, but pod readiness gates additionally count into the overall pod readiness). This may be useful if you want to block (by means of pod disruption budgets that we will talk about next) the roll-out of your workload/nodes in case some (possibly external) condition fails.

the new `AlwaysAllow` option is probably the better choice in most of the cases while `IfHealthyBudget` is useful only if you have frequent temporary transitions or for special cases where you have already implemented controllers that depend on the old behavior.

## Pod Topology Spread Constraints

> Pod topology spread constraints or PTSC for short (no official abbreviation exists, but we will use this in the following) are enormously helpful to distribute your replicas across multiple zones, nodes, or any other user-defined topology domain. Read [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/topology-spread-constraints) about them. They complement and improve on [pod (anti-)affinities](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#affinity-and-anti-affinity) that still exist and can be used in combination).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pod topology spread constraints or PTSC for short (no official abbreviation exists, but we will use this in the following) are enormously helpful to distribute your replicas across multiple zones, nodes, or any other user-defined topology domain. Read [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/topology-spread-constraints) about them. They complement and improve on [pod (anti-)affinities](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#affinity-and-anti-affinity) that still exist and can be used in combination.
```

Author: Thx

> PTSCs are an improvement, because they allow for `maxSkew` and `minDomains`. You can steer the "level of tolerated imbalance" with `maxSkew`, e.g. you probably want that to be at least 1, so that you can perform a rolling update, but this all depends on your [deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#rolling-update-deployment) (`maxUnavailable` and `maxSurge`), etc. [Stateful sets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/#rolling-updates) are a bit different (`maxUnavailable`) as they are bound to volumes and depend on them, so there usually cannot be 2 pods requiring the same volume. `minDomains` is a hint to tell the scheduler how far to spread, e.g. if all nodes in one zone disappeared because of a zone outage, it may "appear" as if there are only 2 zones in a 3 zones cluster and the scheduling decisions may end up wrong, so a `minDomains` of 3 will tell the scheduler to spread to 3 zones before adding another replica in one zone. Be careful with this setting as it also means, if one zone is down the "spread" is already at least 1, if pods run in the other zones. This is useful where you have exactly as many replicas as you have zones and you do not want any imbalance. Imbalance is critical as if you end up with one, nobody is going to do the (active) re-balancing for you. So, for instance, if you have something like a DBMS that you want to spread across 2 zones (active-passive) or 3 zones (quorum-based), you better specify `minDomains` of 2 respectively 3 to force your replicas into at least that many zones before adding more replicas to another zone (if supported).

Reviewer: There is [descheduler](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/descheduler), which can trigger rebalancing. It could also be run inside the cluster if desired. Maybe we want to mention it.

Author: Yes, that's a good idea, I will.

## Pod Affinities and Anti-Affinities

As said, you can combine PTSCs with pod affinities and/or anti-affinities. Read [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#affinity-and-anti-affinity) about them. Especially [inter-pod (anti-)affinities](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#inter-pod-affinity-and-anti-affinity) may be helpful to place pods *apart*, e.g. because they are fall-backs for each other or you do not want multiple potentially resource-hungry ["best-effort"](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-qos/#besteffort) or ["burstable"](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-qos/#burstable) pods side-by-side (noisy neighbor problem), or *together*, e.g. because they form a unit and you want to reduce the failure domain, reduce the network latency, and reduce the costs.

## Topology Aware Hints

> While this is not directly related to HA, it is very relevant in this context (spreading your workload across multiple zones generally increases network latency and costs) and this feature (beta since Kubernetes `v1.23`, replacing the now deprecated topology aware traffic routing with topology keys) helps to route the traffic more optimally (keep it were it originates). Basically, it tells `kube-proxy` how to setup your routing information so that clients can talk to endpoints that are more optimal (a.k.a. within the same zone). Read [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints) about them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this is not directly related to HA, it is very relevant in this context (spreading your workload across multiple zones generally increases network latency and costs) and this feature (beta since Kubernetes `v1.23`, replacing the now deprecated topology aware traffic routing with topology keys) helps to route the traffic better (keep it were it originates). Basically, it tells `kube-proxy` how to setup your routing information so that clients can talk to endpoints that are within the same zone. Read [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints) about them.
```

Author: Thx

> Be aware however, that there are some limitations that we discussed with the Kubernetes networking SIG and [Tim Hockin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tim-hockin-6501072) specifically and that the maintainers are reluctant to drop. Those are called [safeguards](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/#safeguards) and if they strike, the hints are off and traffic is routed again randomly. Especially controversial is the balancing limitation as there is the assumption, that the load that hits an endpoint is determined by the allocatable CPUs in that topology zone, but that's not always if even mostly the case (we opened among others [#110714](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110714)). So, this limitation hits far too often and your hints are off, but then again, it's about network latency and cost optimization first, so it's better than nothing.

Reviewer 3: I would vote to link https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/113731 instead of https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110714. It should better summarize what are the issues we hit with TopologyAwareHints.

Author: You are right, I will add yours on position 1. Thank you!

> Be aware however, that there are some limitations that we discussed with the Kubernetes networking SIG and [Tim Hockin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tim-hockin-6501072) specifically and that the maintainers are reluctant to drop. Those are called [safeguards](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/#safeguards) and if they strike, the hints are off and traffic is routed again randomly. Especially controversial is the balancing limitation as there is the assumption, that the load that hits an endpoint is determined by the allocatable CPUs in that topology zone, but that's not always if even mostly the case (we opened among others [#110714](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110714)). So, this limitation hits far too often and your hints are off, but then again, it's about network latency and cost optimization first, so it's better than nothing.

Reviewer 5: Why is Tim explicitly named here? Kubernetes networking SIG should be sufficient from my point of view.

Author: I was hoping for more attention, by him if he reads it (I like to publish this document as blog) and/or the other chaps from the SIG. But ok, I remove his name.

> Be aware however, that there are some limitations that we discussed with the Kubernetes networking SIG and [Tim Hockin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tim-hockin-6501072) specifically and that the maintainers are reluctant to drop. Those are called [safeguards](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/#safeguards) and if they strike, the hints are off and traffic is routed again randomly. Especially controversial is the balancing limitation as there is the assumption, that the load that hits an endpoint is determined by the allocatable CPUs in that topology zone, but that's not always if even mostly the case (we opened among others [#110714](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110714)). So, this limitation hits far too often and your hints are off, but then again, it's about network latency and cost optimization first, so it's better than nothing.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Be aware however, that there are some limitations that we discussed with the Kubernetes networking SIG and that the maintainers are reluctant to drop. Those are called [safeguards](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/#safeguards) and if they strike, the hints are off and traffic is routed again randomly. Especially controversial is the balancing limitation as there is the assumption, that the load that hits an endpoint is determined by the allocatable CPUs in that topology zone, but that's not always if even mostly the case (we opened among others [#110714](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110714)). So, this limitation hits far too often and your hints are off, but then again, it's about network latency and cost optimization first, so it's better than nothing.
```
Why is Tim named explicitly here? Kubernetes networking SIG should be sufficient from my point.

## Networking

> We have talked about networking only to some small degree so far (`readiness` probes, pod disruption budgets, topology aware hints). The most important component is probably your ingress load balancer - everything else is managed by Kubernetes. AWS, Azure, GCP, and also OpenStack offer multi-zonal load balancers, so make use of them. In Azure and GCP, LBs are regional whereas in AWS and OpenStack, they need to be bound to a zone, which the cloud-controller-manager does by observing the zone labels at the nodes (please note that this behavior is not always working as expected, see [#570](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-aws/issues/569) that we opened on the AWS cloud-controller-manager not readjusting to newly observed zones).

Reviewer: Ingress certainly is very important. However, almost the same holds for egress, which is usually done via NAT gateways. NAT gateways can also be zonal, which will cause issues if the corresponding zone goes down and you have no other NAT gateway.

@kon-angelo may be able to provide more details on the infrastructure related details.

Author: True, I will mention this as well.

This section feels generally the weakest (because I know only few things and none from the code, but only from configuration/observation), so if you have other advice, let's add it.

Thank you!

Author: @ScheererJ, on second thought, end users cannot really configure those (LBs they create themselves) - they get them from Gardener. Do you mean specific cloud provider configurations that I shall mention?

cc also @kon-angelo and @dkistner

> Please be reminded that even if you use a service mesh like Istio, the off-the-shelf installation/configuration usually never comes with productive qualities and you will have to fine-tune your installation/configuration, much like the rest of your workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please be reminded that even if you use a service mesh like [Istio](https://istio.io), the off-the-shelf installation/configuration usually never comes with productive qualities and you will have to fine-tune your installation/configuration, much like the rest of your workload.
```

Author: Thx

## Relevant Cluster Settings

Following now a summary/list of the more relevant settings you may like to tune for Gardener-managed clusters:

``` yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Shoot
spec:
  controlPlane:
    highAvailability:
      failureTolerance:
        type: zone # valid values are `node` and `zone` (only available if your control plane resides in a region with 3+ zones)
  kubernetes:
    kubeAPIServer:
      defaultNotReadyTolerationSeconds: 300
      defaultUnreachableTolerationSeconds: 300
    kubelet:
      ...
    kubeScheduler:
      featureGates:
        MinDomainsInPodTopologySpread: true
    kubeControllerManager:
      nodeMonitorPeriod: 10s

>       nodeMonitorGracePeriod: 2m0s

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      nodeMonitorGracePeriod: 40s
```

Reviewer 2: We're now at the point where we're tuning these example properties in a doc, because we know what happens: people will copy them verbatim to their yamls. That's what I wanted to avoid with my comments above, unless we have good reasons to provide these copy-paste snippets or want to point to very specific properties.

Reviewer 5: `40s` is the default value ([ref](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-controller-manager/)), no fine tuning. I don't know why we explicitly wanted to point to `2m0s` but maybe Vedran can explain.

Author: @timuthy I didn't want to point to or recommend 2m. I copied the fields from a shoot cluster for illustration. It's the default in gardener (2m, not 40s). The reason is somewhat convoluted. I changed it now to 40s, but you will know that today, this makes DWD pointless as it will then react too late.

Reviewer 5: Indeed, we are in a miserable situation with this setting at the moment and maybe I added the result of our latest offline discussion too early here.

      recommenderInterval: 1m0s
      updaterInterval: 1m0s
    clusterAutoscaler:
      expander: "least-waste"
      scanInterval: 5s
      scaleDownDelayAfterAdd: 1m
      scaleDownDelayAfterDelete: 0s
      scaleDownDelayAfterFailure: 1m
      scaleDownUnneededTime: 1m
      scaleDownUtilizationThreshold: 0.5
  provider:
    workers:
    - name: ...
      minimum: 6
      maximum: 60
      maxSurge: 3
      maxUnavailable: 0
      zones:
      - ... # list of zones you want your worker pool nodes to be spread across, see above
      kubernetes:
        kubelet:
          ... # similar to `kubelet` above (cluster-wide settings), but here per worker pool (pool-specific settings), see above
      machineControllerManager: # optional, it allows to configure the machine-controller settings.
        machineCreationTimeout: 10m
        machineHealthTimeout: 2m
        machineDrainTimeout: 5m
  systemComponents:
    coreDNS:
      autoscaling:
        mode: horizontal # valid values are `horizontal` (driven by CPU load) and `cluster-proportional` (driven by number of nodes/cores)
```

#### On `spec.controlPlane.highAvailability.failureTolerance.type`

> If set, determines the degree of failure tolerance for your control plane. `zone` is preferred, but only available if your control plane resides in a region with 3+ zones. See [above](#control-plane) and the [docs](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot_high_availability.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If set, determines the degree of failure tolerance for your control plane. `zone` is preferred, but only available if your control plane resides in a region with 3+ zones. See [above](#control-plane) and the [docs](shoot_high_availability.md).
```

You can also override the cluster-wide API server settings [individually per pod](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/taint-and-toleration/#taint-based-evictions):

``` yaml
spec:
  tolerations:
  - key: "node.kubernetes.io/unreachable"
    operator: "Exists"
    effect: "NoExecute"
    tolerationSeconds: 0
  - key: "node.kubernetes.io/not-ready"
    operator: "Exists"
    effect: "NoExecute"
    tolerationSeconds: 0
```

This will evict pods on unreachable or not-ready nodes immediately, but be cautious: `0` is very aggressive and may lead to unnecessary disruptions. Again, you must decide for your own workload and balance out the pros and cons (e.g. long startup time).

> Please note, these settings replace the deprecated `spec.kubernetes.kubeControllerManager.podEvictionTimeout` that was removed with Kubernetes `v1.26` (and acted as an upper bound).

Reviewer 3: Nit: The `--pod-eviction-timeout` flag was deprecated in K8s 1.26 with https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/113710. There are several open PRs to remove it for 1.27.

```suggestion
Please note, these settings replace the `spec.kubernetes.kubeControllerManager.podEvictionTimeout` field that was deprecated in Kubernetes `v1.26` (and acted as an upper bound).
```

Author: Thanks. I only checked the KCM options and they were gone in the docs, but that's not what I wrote. I will improve as suggested.

#### On `spec.kubernetes.kubeScheduler.featureGates.MinDomainsInPodTopologySpread`

> Required to be enabled for `minDomains` to work with PTSCs. See [above](#pod-topology-spread-constraints) and the [docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/topology-spread-constraints/#topologyspreadconstraints-field). This tells the scheduler, how many topology domains to expect (=zones in the context of this document).

Reviewer 5: (Only) available since `v1.24` and automatically enabled since `v1.25`.

Author: It is still listed as `default`=`false`, is it not: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates

Reviewer 5: Right, thanks for the hint (thought `beta` => `enabled`). Then just mention that this is only available in 1.24 and later?

#### On `spec.kubernetes.kubeControllerManager.horizontalPodAutoscaler...`

This configures horizontal pod autoscaling in Gardener-managed clusters. See [above](#replicas-horizontal-scaling) and [here](https://kubernetes.io/de/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale) for the detailed fields.

#### On `spec.kubernetes.verticalPodAutoscaler...`

This configures vertical pod autoscaling in Gardener-managed clusters. See [above](#resources-vertical-scaling) and [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler/FAQ.md) for the detailed fields.

#### On `spec.kubernetes.clusterAutoscaler...`

This configures node auto-scaling in Gardener-managed clusters. See [above](#worker-pools) and [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md) for the detailed fields, especially about [expanders](https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler/blob/machine-controller-manager-provider/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#what-are-expanders), which may become life-saving in case of a zone outage when a resource crunch is setting in and everybody rushes to get machines in the healthy zones.

> In case of a zone outage, it may be interesting to understand how the cluster autoscaler will put a worker pool in one zone into "back-off" (unfortunately, the official cluster autoscaler documentation does not explain these details, but you can find hints in the sources [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/b94f340af58eb063df9ebfcd65835f9a499a69a2/cluster-autoscaler/config/autoscaling_options.go#L214-L219) and following):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of a zone outage, it may be interesting to understand how the cluster autoscaler will put a worker pool in one zone into "back-off". Unfortunately, the official cluster autoscaler documentation does not explain these details, but you can find hints in the sources [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/b94f340af58eb063df9ebfcd65835f9a499a69a2/cluster-autoscaler/config/autoscaling_options.go#L214-L219) and following:
```

Author: Thx

- The shorter `machineHealthTimeout` is, the faster MCM will replace machines/nodes in case the kubelet isn't reporting back, which translates to `Unknown`, or reports back with `NotReady`, or the [node-problem-detector](https://github.com/kubernetes/node-problem-detector) that Gardener deploys for you reports a non-recoverable issue/condition (e.g. read-only file system). If it is too short however, you risk node and pod trashing, so be careful.
- The shorter `machineDrainTimeout` is, the faster you can get rid of machines/nodes that MCM decided to remove, but this puts a cap on the grace periods and PDBs. They are respected up until the drain timeout lapses - then the machine/node will be forcefully terminated, whether or not the pods are still in termination or not even terminated because of PDBs. Those PDBs will then be violated, so be careful here as well. Please align with the cluster autoscaler's `maxGracefulTerminationSeconds`.

Especially the last two settings may help you recover faster from cloud provider issues.

#### On `spec.systemComponents.coreDNS.autoscaling`

> DNS is critical, in general and also within a Kubernetes cluster. Gardener-managed clusters deploy [CoreDNS](https://coredns.io), a graduated CNCF project. Gardener supports 2 auto-scaling modes for it, `horizontal` (using HPA based on CPU) and `cluster-proportional` (using [cluster proportional autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-proportional-autoscaler) that scales the number of pods based on the number of nodes/cores, not to be confused with the cluster autoscaler that scales nodes based on their utilization). Check out the [docs](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/dns-autoscaling.md), especially the [trade-offs](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/dns-autoscaling.md#trade-offs-of-horizontal-and-cluster-proportional-dns-autoscaling) why you would chose one over the other (`cluster-proportional` gives you more configuration options, if CPU-based horizontal scaling is insufficient to your needs). Consider also Gardener's feature [node-local DNS](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/node-local-dns.md) to decouple you further from the DNS pods and stabilize DNS. Again, that's not strictly related to HA, but may become important during a zone outage, when load patterns shift and pods start to initialize/resolve DNS records more frequently in bulk.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
DNS is critical, in general and also within a Kubernetes cluster. Gardener-managed clusters deploy [CoreDNS](https://coredns.io), a graduated CNCF project. Gardener supports 2 auto-scaling modes for it, `horizontal` (using HPA based on CPU) and `cluster-proportional` (using [cluster proportional autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-proportional-autoscaler) that scales the number of pods based on the number of nodes/cores, not to be confused with the cluster autoscaler that scales nodes based on their utilization). Check out the [docs](dns-autoscaling.md), especially the [trade-offs](dns-autoscaling.md#trade-offs-of-horizontal-and-cluster-proportional-dns-autoscaling) why you would chose one over the other (`cluster-proportional` gives you more configuration options, if CPU-based horizontal scaling is insufficient to your needs). Consider also Gardener's feature [node-local DNS](node-local-dns.md) to decouple you further from the DNS pods and stabilize DNS. Again, that's not strictly related to HA, but may become important during a zone outage, when load patterns shift and pods start to initialize/resolve DNS records more frequently in bulk.
```

## More Caveats

Unfortunately, there are a few things of note when it comes to HA in a Kubernetes cluster that may be "surprising" and are hard to mitigate:

- If the `kubelet` restarts, it will report all pods as `NotReady` on startup until it reruns its probes ([#100277](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/100277)), which leads to temporary endpoint and load balancer target removal ([#102367](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/102367)). Pull requests to improve from our colleagues were rejected. [Tim Hockin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tim-hockin-6501072) joined the discussion as well, criticizing the current behavior, but so far to no avail. Gardener uses rolling updates and a jitter to spread necessary `kubelet` restarts as good as possible, but this `kubelet` logic is suboptimal and unpredictable.

> - If a `kube-proxy` pod on a node turns `NotReady`, all load balancer traffic to all pods under services with `externalTrafficPolicy` `local` will cease as the load balancer will then take this node out of serving. This makes no sense and was discussed by us in [Slack Kubernetes #sig-network](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C09QYUH5W/p1642764716200400), but the maintainers remain reluctant (like above) to change the current behavior (even though nobody could remember why this was ever done or deliver a reason why it may be a good thing to keep). So, please remember that `externalTrafficPolicy` `local` not only has the disadvantage of imbalanced traffic spreading, but also a dependency to the kube-proxy pod that may and will be unavailable during updates. Gardener uses rolling updates to spread necessary `kube-proxy` updates as good as possible, but this `kube-proxy` logic is suboptimal and unpredictable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a `kube-proxy` pod on a node turns `NotReady`, all load balancer traffic to all pods (on this node) under services with `externalTrafficPolicy` `local` will cease as the load balancer will then take this node out of serving. This makes no sense and was discussed by us in [Slack Kubernetes #sig-network](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C09QYUH5W/p1642764716200400), but the maintainers remain reluctant (like above) to change the current behavior (even though nobody could remember why this was ever done or deliver a reason why it may be a good thing to keep). So, please remember that `externalTrafficPolicy` `local` not only has the disadvantage of imbalanced traffic spreading, but also a dependency to the `kube-proxy` pod that may and will be unavailable during updates. Gardener uses rolling updates to spread necessary `kube-proxy` updates as good as possible, but this `kube-proxy` logic is suboptimal and unpredictable.
```

Author: Thx

These things of note are just a start and by no means complete. They may or may not affect you, but other intricacies may. It's a reminder to be watchful as Kubernetes may have one or two relevant quirks that you need to consider (and will probably only find out over time and with extensive testing).

## Meaningful Availability

> Finally, let's go back to where we started. We recommended to measure the [*meaningful availability*](https://research.google/pubs/pub50828) (as opposed to the *meaningless availability*, a term coined by a great colleague of mine who introduced me to the subject matter). In Gardener, we cannot do that to the extent that we'd like to as the means of interaction with Gardener and its clusters is `kubectl` that we do not control. Plus, it remains difficult to tell apart "user-local phenomena" from the service as such. Still, we do not trust only internal signals, but track also whether Gardener or the control planes that it manages are externally available through the external DNS records and load balancers, SNI-routing Istio gateways, etc. (the same path all users must take). It's a huge difference whether the API server's internal readiness probe passes or the user can actually reach the API server and it does what it's supposed to do. Most likely, you will be in a similar spot and can do the same.

Reviewer 5: >  In Gardener, we cannot do that to the extent that we'd like to as the means of interaction with Gardener and its clusters is `kubectl` that we do not control.

Should we mention this here at all? To me it's very unspecific and I'm not aware of the importance to the reader.

Author: Thank you very much, agreed, I cut that paragraph down significantly and kept only enough to mention DWD (not so much that end users leverage it, but as an example that internal probes are not always sufficient).
